Hello everyone and welcome to this lecture.
The code along for the portfolio optimization.
We're going to consist of two parts here.
One is the Monte-Carlo simulation where we choose a bunch of random applications.
And the second part will be actually using an optimization algorithm.
Let's open up a new chapter notebook and get started.
OK so to begin with all this we need to import some PI and P Well import Pandurs PD and then we're going
to import that plot lib pipe plot as Piazzi and to see our plots here we'll see that plot live in line
Raemer you'll need to use Pilton that show if you're not using the Jupiter notebook.
Now I'm going to go ahead and grab our data and I'm going to use the CSP files that we provide you can
also use quando if you want just like we did before but we have all the close prices already set up
for you.
Set the index column to be the date column and then go ahead and say parse dates to be true.
And then I'm going to copy this and we're going to paste it three more times here and then edit the
actual stock names.
So we'll have Amazon on this and then we'll have IBM then we'll have Cisco here.
And let's go ahead.
These say Cisco close IBM close and then the last one is a M.Z. and close.
So those are for CACP files we provide you.
And if you just tap autocomplete it should actually fill those in for you.
But here we have Apple Cisco IBM and Amazon and then we're going to concatenate all of them together
will say stocks PD concatenate Anatolians concatenate Apple Cisco IBM and Amazon along axes to once
we kind of put all those columns together.
Then let me go ahead and rename the columns so that we actually know what stocks they refer to we'll
say stock stock columns is equal to Apple Cisco and we put a comma here not a period.
There you go.
Apple Cisco IBM and Amazon.
So if we run that and checked the head of the stocks they frame we now have Apple Cisco IBM and Amazon
and the closing prices.
So we're going to do now is show you a couple of different things that we're going to be using to simulate
thousands of possible applications.
One thing we can end up using is the mean daily return and that's easy enough to get we just say stocks
per cent change.
One mean and that will be the mean daily return here.
And then what it can also do is show the correlation between the returns but we won't really be using
this but this is sometimes interesting to check out.
You can say PC t change one and then say c o r r and this just returns back the Pearson correlation
coefficient between all the time series.
So obviously a time series is going to be perfectly correlated with itself.
But here you can check out well how correlated to Cisco's stock to Apple stock.
And later on we get to see how we can use correlation to do something known as Pear's trading.
For now though we just kind of showing you this in case you ever want to explore this on your own.
So to get started we're going to show you a couple of few things one of the main ones being logarithmic
returns versus arithmetic returns.
So we're going to do for the rest of this notebook we're going to switch over to using log returns instead
of arithmetic returns.
For many of our use cases they're almost the same as you'll see in just a second.
But most technical analysis techniques required trending or normalizing the time series and using log
returns is a nice way to do that.
So a lot of returns are really convenient to work with.
For a lot of the algorithms we encounter and you can go ahead and check out the notebook link for an
article on why you should use low returns versus just arithmetic returns to be perfectly honest.
A lot of times it doesn't make a huge difference especially for the more basic techniques we use.
But as you get to more and more complex techniques which require these normalization of these time series
using log returns is a nice easy way to take care of those problems.
So to show you how similar they are just going to do socks percent change one and you the head of this.
Remember this is just the daily returns arithmetically.
And if we were to do this using logarithmic returns it would be the following we would take the log
of stocks divided by stocks shifted over by one so shift over by one and we're going to call these the
log Rhett's or log returns and if I show the head of this you'll see just how similar they are.
So here we can see for example the very first values 0.00 5 3 7 4 here in the logarithmic return it's
zero point 0 0 5 3 6.
So extremely similar and you can see here as you continue on the numbers themselves are really quite
similar.
So that's why it hasn't been really affecting us previously and for a lot of other techniques it really
won't make a huge difference.
But just in case you're using a particular technical analysis analysis technique that requires the sort
of the trending or normalization using logarithmic returns.
This is how you can do that quite simply epilog stocks of IDBI stocks shifted over one time period and
well you can also kind of check out the log returns histograms.
So it's going to say been 0 to 100 here and say the figure sizes say 12 Bay and let's go ahead and say
Piazzi I'll say Titely out just in case there's any overlapping here because I'm doing a histogram of
the entire data frame so we should see for a little histogram plots here.
So you see Apple Amazon Cisco and IBM you can kind of explore the returns here comparison to one another.
All right.
So we're going to go ahead and do is show you a couple of more things that we can use later on.
If we took a log return mean this gives us back the average or mean return logarithmically speaking
for each of the stocks.
Something else we're going to use and we're doing the random allocations we're going to compute the
pairwise covariance of the columns.
So to do that it's log Rhett's and c o r r is the correlation of the columns and if you do CORV it's
the covariance of the columns and you can just check out the Wikipedia articles for those actual formulas
and what they represent.
But they're quite similar.
Here's the covariance of the log for returns here.
OK.
So now we're going to do is we can take logarithmic returns covariance and multiply it by the number
of business days to get these values.
And these are some values are going to be using on later.
So keep this in mind we will actually use these right now but later on for one of the key steps in the
random allocations we'll be using this sort of analysis technique.
OK let's go ahead and do a single run for some random allocations and then we'll put it in a for loop
and then do thousands of random allocations.
So the first thing to do is I'm going to go ahead and print stock stock columns so we remember the order
that we're working stuff in and then I'm going to say weights is equal to NPR-A random random 4.
And then let's go ahead and print those weights and let's print the phrase random weights.
So if I run this I can see my index.
Apple Cisco IBM Amazon I say ran them whites and have created some random weights to each of these stocks
for their allocations.
Now there is a small problem here is that these random weights do not add up to 1.0.
So to make sure that's the case all we're doing is dividing it by the sum of the weights.
So that tells you how we can do that.
We're going to say Prince rebalance
and I'm going to print it out.
Well first off let's pronounce Waites.
But before we do that let's actually rebalance them the easiest way to rebalance these to make sure
they are all equal.
One is to just take the weight survey and then divide each of those values by the sum of weights.
And this is essentially a normalization technique.
So now I want to run this.
I can see the following.
Here are my stocks.
Here are my random weights and then I rebalance them to get these.
Now as a quick note you'll notice I'm getting random weights that are different every time.
And technically that makes sense because I am asking for random numbers.
Well it'd be nice if I got the same random set of numbers every time.
To do that when you can do is say N.P. random
seed.
And this is going to set a seed value for the random numbers.
That way you technically get the same random numbers every time.
So if I run this again with seed 101 and this is just an arbitrary number it's going to be whatever
you want.
I would recommend you set it to 1 to 1.
That way your values match up to my values.
But every time you run this you should get the same random weights.
Now keep in mind if I were to copy this and paste it in another cell then I would not get the same weights.
So if I run this more than once I get a different set of random weights.
It's the fact that the random seed is in the same cell that I'm resetting the seed every single time
that I run these commands here.
So keep that in mind.
You should be putting everything in a single cell to get the same results I do.
If you keep running this in a different cell where the seats are already been set you will end up getting
different random numbers than me.
So something to keep in mind.
Now what's nice about this is no matter how many times I run the sell I'll keep getting the same random
weights and same random rebalancing OK so that's the rebalancing step.
Now what I'm going to do is the expected return step.
So say expect that a return remember to actually get the Sharpe ratio we want to get the expected porfolio
return divided by the expected volatility.
So I'm going to print out
expected a portfolio return a created a variable called expected return.
And so we're going to kind of use some clever math but I'm just basically going to take my Lague returns.
Take the average of them multiply them by weights and multiply that by 252.
And later on.
Well it's actually well firstly to technically multiply these two together although it doesn't really
matter because of the way this is working.
It just lines up better with the form of the equation.
We expressed that again.
All we're doing here is we are taking the average log returns.
So if you take a look at what that was.
Remember it's these values then you're going to multiply it by the weights we just created which will
get you these values and then we're going to multiply that by 250 to technically 252 trading days.
Then we're going to take the sum of this and then that's our expected return.
So in terms of logarithmic or turn over the entire tuner for the two days that's our expected return
because we took the some of it.
Next thing to do is calculate the expected variance or I should say volatility really.
So I'm going to prance expected volatility and this is basically the denominator of the volatility.
This is the diameter of the Sharpe ratio formula so expect that volatility and we're essentially going
to use some linear algebra here.
So don't be too concerned with the entire method here.
There are other ways to do this that lineup more of what we did in the previous code a long lecture.
This is kind of just utilizing numb pie's linear algebra techniques so that it performs a lot faster
and it has to have taking up products.
So we're going to take the transpose the weights dot product transpose way with the dot product of the
covariance of the returns multiplied by 252.
And then that's also going to take in the weights here.
So to make sure I did that right now it's kind of separate out what we're doing here.
So the first thing in doing is inside of this I'm taking the dot product of the covariance of the log
returns multiplied by 10 or 52 with the weights.
So once I take that product anoints take the dot product of that multiplied by the transpose weights.
So that's what's happening here.
And then we take the square root of that whole thing and that gives you the expected volatility.
This is kind of complex as far as what we're doing here.
The reason we're doing it this way is that it's basically a lot more efficient code wise.
It's kind of using some clever linear algebra here.
If this kind of going over your head.
Don't worry about it too much.
You could technically rewrite this to match up with everything we did in the previous code long lecture.
It would just run slower since we're going to do thousands of applications.
We kind of want to use linear algebra toward advantage.
So we kind of have this more complex writing of this.
But then that allows us to just get the Sharpe ratio.
So we're going to print out what's Sharpe ratio and also S.R. to be equal to the expected return divided
by the expected volatility.
And then let's print out our.
So if I run this I got my random weights I rebalance them so they all equal one may expect that portfolio
return.
Whoops forgot to print the expected a return.
Is this value in the expected volatility.
Also forgot to print that
run that is this and then that gives me a sharper ratio.
There are plenty of force hasn't quite reached one yet but you can see what we're doing here.
OK.
The next step would be to do all of this.
But thousands of times over.
So that's how we're going to do in the very next lecture.
We're going to run that couple of thousand times.
We're going to plot out the data.
Then after that we'll do another lecture where we actually show you mathematically the better way of
optimizing it instead of just doing thousands of random allocations and then we'll also show you how
to get the efficient frontier.
Okay.
So right now all we've done so far is basically grabbed our data and set up the formula we're going
to be using for those random allocation.
So we're going to take all this stuff take a get rid of the print statements and then put it in a for
loop or we do let's say like 25000 applications.
So in the very next lecture we're going to go through those thousands of applications and put all this
in a for loop and then do some plotting.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you there.